---
title: Roman Batko
layout: page
speaker: true
categories: [speaker]
date: 2015-04-03
comments: false

---

## *Panopticon* -  cybercontrol in liquid modernity: what does control really mean in contemporary management?

#### Abstract:

The paper proposes a critical analysis of the panopticon, the model of
an ideal prison devised in the 18th century by the English philosopher
Jeremy Bentham, and its function in modern management. The original
prison was designed in such a way that it enabled a single prison guard
to watch all the inmates at all times, while the latter could never tell
whether they were currently being watched or not. The idea behind the
*panopticon* gave rise to the concept of panopticism, a philosophy
developed by the French thinker Michel Foucault, which he voiced in
*Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison* (1975/1995). Analyzing
the mechanism of control through the ages, he ponders the resilience and
adaptability of such concepts as discipline, training and hierarchical
surveillance. According to Foucault, man is held captive by the control
machine equipped with an apparatus for observation, recording and
training. Today these very concepts, if slightly euphemized, constitute
the cornerstone of *scientific management*. I intend to provide a
critical analysis of the modern methods and techniques of control, which
more often than not is executed nowadays by surveillance equipment and
computer programs; hence my term of choice - “cybercontrol”. In the
presentation of the results of my qualitative research conducted at
selected organizations I am going to rely on the conceptual apparatus of
*Critical Management Study* (Alvesson, Willmott 1992, 2003). Exercising
control is one of the fundamental functions of management.
Organizational structures, processes, and rules enable managers to
control the chaos which could otherwise easily substitute cooperation.
Over the recent decades, however, the control mechanisms have escalated
beyond any reasonable proportions, becoming the modern embodiment of the
original panopticon (Taylor, 2015). There is a growing tendency to
monitor all employee activity (including non-work-related behavior) by
means of oppressive calculating equipment which records every computer
click, every second of a telephone conversation, and the exact time
spent away from one’s desk. Some companies take the control issue
further still, introducing elements which can only be described as a
prelude to total control: for instance, the Swedish firm *Epicenter*
makes its employees wear microchip implants equipped with a radio
locator, which – according to the company’s rhetoric - are to better
safeguard their privacy. Last but not least, there are the global
internet services and networks, such as *Google*, *Facebook* and
numerous others, which exercise control over billions of users,
gathering personal information about their age, gender and interests,
and are even able to trace, by means of the GPS system, their exact
location. The services also record all search histories, e-mails,
calendars, photographs and other files which become, in fact, indelible
traces billions of people leave behind on servers, for anyone to use and
abuse. The inevitable question is, is the brave new project such as *the
Global Brain*, with its attributes of omniscience, omnipresence,
omnipotence (Heylighen, 2014), yet another tool encouraging omnipotent
control? And is not the struggle man today undertakes – raging, in the
name of reclaiming his freedom, against the machine, our desperate
attempt to save the virtues of humanism in the face of the imminent
mutation of man into the cyborg?

#### References:

Alvesson, M., & Willmott, H. (Eds.). (1992). *Critical Management
Studies*. London ; Newbury Park: SAGE Publications Ltd.

Alvesson, M., & Willmott, H. (Eds.). (2003). *Studying Management
Critically*. London; Thousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE Publications Ltd.

Foucault, M. (1995). *Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the Prison*. New
York: Vintage Books.

Heylighen, F. (2013). *Return to Eden? Promises and Perils on the Road
to a Global Superintelligence*. In B. Goertzel & T. Goertzel (Eds.), The
End of the Beginning: Life, Society and Economy on the Brink of the
Singularity. Retrieved from
[http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/BrinkofSingularity.pdf](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/BrinkofSingularity.pdf)

Taylor, S. S. (2015). "Controls and Constraints". *Organizational
Aesthetics*, 4(1), 1–3.
