---
title: Alexei Tikhomirov, Andrey Trufanov & Alessandra Rossodivita
layout: page
speaker: true
categories: [speaker]
date: 2015-04-08
comments: true

---

## Global Brain and beyond: a new model of interating networks

### Abstact:

#### Introduction
Following to [Weinbaum, 2012 ] global brain (GB) is a projected emergence of a new control structure from the coordinated interactions of human and machine agents. Essentially complex control structures emerge by integration of relatively primitive interacting actors which form a kind of a complex network. The GB unites all human beings (HB) with the worldwide network of information and communication technologies similar to cortex and concomitant activities of human body. Last decade qualitative and quantitative techniques of complex networks, based significantly on graph theory have been elegantly utilized in brain network organization studies [Goni et al., 2014 ] . It is notable that mathematical beauty of property graphs (PGs), multi-relational graphs (MRGs), multi graphs (MuGs), edge-colored graphs (ECGs) encountered with complexity of practice. All these graphs have demonstrated specific but limited capacities for system analysis so far.Having been proposed to denote attributes, PGs and MRGs which are powerful per se but overloaded with labels and maps [Rodriguez and Shinavier , 2009], and thus often complicate the issue rather than clarify it. MuGs and ECGs are graphs which are permitted to have multiple edges, but not multiple vertexes that limits their capacity.Moreover graphs is a platform for mathematicians, even somewhat effective, while complex networks represent multidisciplinary language available for experts of diverse domains who might not be inspired with Path Algebra Operations at all. Additionally complex networks [Albert and Barabasi, 2002] concept ( that comprises a theory and tools both ) have operated with dynamic sets of elements and become of interest for analysis of transition processes. It seems of sense to describe cognitive agents of GB and environment elements as actors of different (biosocial and technological ) divisions of the complex network. Interconnection is implied within supposed cognitive activity of the GB network: changes in the biotechnological division activate changes in the social division and vice versa. Such activity has consequences on the dynamic structures of both interconnected divisions. Development and support of socio-economic and technological structures and their robustness are should be among vital issues of global brain. Even for complex networks which had been studied intensively for a decade, their exploration still concentrates on the platform of single non-interacting network. It has been recognized that there is a need in elaboration in reliable and transparent tools for studying interconnected complex networks [Gao, et al, 2012, Torres et al., 2013].

####Model

Further to scientific discussion the authors within existing methodology framework developed and applied a stem network (SN) concept [ Tikhomirov and Trufanov, 2015] . This concept takes into account intrinsic multilayered thematic and dynamic nature of real multi-actor systems. Multiple nodes of a multiplex networks are called stems. The stem network is described by the triple \\(B=(S, T, C)\\), "bed", where \\(S\\) is nonempty set of stems , \\(T\\) is a nonempty set of thematic layers, \\(C = (C\_{1}, C\_{2}, ..., C\_{t})\\) is a set of binary relations on the S, where Ci corresponds thematic layer i. In traditional words, SN-network is a network which is permitted to have multiple nodes, having multithread links of same nature. The GB might converges humans, natural and machine agents and must coordinate and connect a huge and different varieties of them [ Weinbaum, 2012 ].
In present paper just to model GB a **combined** stem network (CSN) is proposed and defined as a specific integration of interdependent SN-networks \\(V= (B\_{1}, B\_{2}, .. B\_{m})\\) , described on m "beds" with nonoverlapping sets of stems, tematic layers and binary relations. Some stems from different "beds" might be united into a group which is called a bouquet. Such a group of real objects - multiplet (pair, triple,....) includes nonrepeatable ( as a rule) coactive stems of different beds \\((S\_{ik}, S\_{lj},…)\\) , where \\(S\_{ik}\\) is a stem i from the bed k . Thus bouquets are partitioned into stems which firm nodes of networks of the same nature. Links within a stem, between different stem nodes of the same layer of the same network, and between stems taken from different networks are put in different categories Links - between the stems inside a bouquet represent binary relations (interactions) such as "dependence" ( D-links), which differ from couplings - "connections" (C-links) that govern the interaction between the stems of a bed; couplings of "bindings"-type (B-links ) describe the relationship between the nodes of the same stem. The concept categorizes system actors as stems, the latter are stratified into nodes according to each thematic layer.The following example demonstrates the idea of combined stem network. Hydroelectric power stations which combine networks of rivers, electric grids and network of professionals in electric power supported by information and communication networks (5 beds in whole) might represent bouquets of the pertinent CSN.
Thus HB networks incorporate professional, family, and friendly connections. While transportation a container might change airlines, railways, boat lines, bus lines…. Naturally it is impossible to combine human beings with gadgets by relative links nor gadgets with HB through electric signals . Such a detailing of links promotes clarification while modeling attacks on separate elements of a network (nodes, stems, bouquets, beds, layers, links-bindings, links-connections, and links-dependencies ) and their combinations. The novel network concept promotes easier understanding and clarification of the implicit and complicated structure the property graphs propose. Also it is of significance that all the familiar graphs pseudographs , multigraphs, property graphs, color edged graphs bear no multiple vertexes. These graph approaches concentrate on subjects of instrument traits while the combined stem network focuses on subjects of nature.
In order to study the problems of safety and sustainable development of systems it has been important to take into account internal properties of stems - capacities. First, capacities are needed to hold loads in a network in terms of centralities ( degree centrality load, bridge centrality load, vicinity centrality load…).Second, those provide robustness while countering diverse attacks.
Time factor t is also included into consideration for reflecting CSN dynamics . Attack schemes of the CSN structures in context of safety problems has been reviewed in frame of a simple analysis of major offensive actions, which are important for study of GB structures described by combined stem networks. 

#### Findings
The proposed model allows the following. Elements of GB network are considered as stems that stand-alone or interconnected and interdependent within and across countries, states, regions, local territories, and sites. Most facilities of a technological infrastructures are proprietary of the private sector or federal, regional, or local governments, and might be stratified into diverse layers on pertinent beds while connected to other systems of the same or different field. All these clarify CSN robustness issues and promote SN safety strategies. Eight Millennium Development goals with 21 targets might be contemplated accordingly as bouquets and subbouquets . Special Summit on Sustainable Development in September 2015 will adopt a new set of goals for the post-2015 development agenda.

#### Summary
An advanced combined stem network model with its qualitative description has been proposed as a comprehensive scope of global brain issues. . Simple terminology has been applied with aim to bridge diverse disciplines and clusters around CSN. The model includes multiplets of elements ( bouquets, stems, beds, layers, nodes, links-bindings, links-connections, and links-dependencies ) in order to formalize interactions of HB networks with environmet infrastructures. Concomitant safety problems has been claimed and clarified. it is necessary to note that this network approach reflects nature of the analyzing domain in compare with graph tools focusing on the instrument specifics.

###References
Albert, R., Barabási A.-L. (2002). Statistical Mechanics of Complex Networks. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74. pp.43-97.

Gao, J., Buldyrev, S.V. , Stanley, H.E. , Havlin, S. (2012) [Networks formed from interdependent networks. Nature Physics](http://www.nature.com/nphys/journal/v8/n1/pdf/nphys2180.pdf). vol. 8, pp. 40-48. doi:10.1038/nphys2180, 

Goni J., van den Heuvel, M.P., Avena-Koenigsberger, A., Velez de Mendizabal, N., Betzel, R.F., Griffa, A., Hagmann, P., Corominas-Murtra, B., Thiran, J.P., Sporns, O. (2014) Resting-brain functional connectivity predicted by analytic measures of network communication. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, pp. 833-838. 

Rodriguez M.A., Shinavier, J. (2009) [Exposing Multi-Relational Networks to Single-Relational Network Analysis Algorithms](http://arxiv.org/pdf/0806.2274v2.pdf ). Journal of Informetrics, 4(1), pp. 29-41. Elsevier, doi:10.1016/j.joi.2009.06.004, 2009. 

Tikhomirov, A. , Trufanov, A. (2015) Interconnected stem networks: Security focus., http://www.pitt.edu/~super1/lecture/lec53061/index.htm 

Torres, J.S. , Caire, R. , Hadjsaid, N. (2013) [Towards a Complex Networks Modeling of Interdependent Critical Infrastructures](https://hal.inria.fr/file/index/docid/780546/filename/Article_Sanchez.pdf). Workshop Interdisciplinaire sur la S´ecurit´e Globale - WISG 2013, Jan 2013, Troyes, France. -6 p. 

Weinbaum, D. (2012). [A Framework for Scalable Cognition: Propagation of challenges, towards the implementation of Global Brain models](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/ECCO/ECCO-Papers/Weaver-Attention.pdf). GBI working paper 2012-02. - 31 p.

## Questions and comments 

